"George, I wish you'd look at the nursery."
"What's wrong with it?"
"I don't know."
"Well, then."
"I  just want you  to look at it, is all, or call a  psychologist in to look at it."
"What would a psychologist want with a nursery?"
"You know very well what he'd want." His  wife  paused in the middle of the kitchen and  watched the stove busy humming to itself, making supper for four.
"It's just that the nursery is different now than it was."
"All right, let's have a look."
They  walked down the hall of their sound proofed Happy life Home, which had  cost them thirty thousand  dollars  installed, this house which clothed and fed and rocked them to sleep and played and sang  and was good to  them. Their approach sensitized  a switch somewhere and the nursery  light flicked on when  they  came within ten  feet  of it. Similarly, behind them, in  the halls,  lights  went  on  and off  as they  left  them  behind, with a  soft automaticity.
"Well," said George Hadley.
They  stood  on the  thatched floor of the nursery. It  was  forty feet across by forty feet long and thirty feet high;  it had cost half  again as much as the rest  of the house. "But nothing's  too good for  our children," George had said.
The nursery was  silent. It was  empty  as a jungle  glade at  hot high noon. The  walls were blank  and two dimensional.  Now, as George and Lydia Hadley stood in  the center of the room, the walls  began to purr and recede into  crystalline  distance,  it  seemed, and  presently  an  African  veldt appeared, in three  dimensions, on  all  sides, in color  reproduced to  the final pebble and bit of straw. The ceiling above them became a deep sky with a hot yellow sun.
George Hadley felt the perspiration start on his brow.
"Let's get out of this sun," he said. "This is a little too real. But I don't see anything wrong."
"Wait a moment, you'll see," said his wife.
Now  the  hidden odorophonics were beginning to blow a wind  of odor at the two people in the  middle of the baked veldtland. The hot straw smell of lion grass, the cool green smell of the hidden  water  hole, the great rusty smell of animals, the  smell of dust like a red paprika in the  hot air. And now the sounds: the thump of distant antelope feet on grassy sod, the papery rustling of vultures. A shadow  passed through the sky. The shadow flickered on George Hadley's upturned, sweating face.
"Filthy creatures," he heard his wife say.
"The vultures."
"You see, there are the lions, far over, that way. Now they're on their way to the water hole. They've just been eating," said Lydia. "I  don't know what."
"Some animal." George Hadley put his hand up to shield  off the burning light from his squinted eyes. "A zebra or a baby giraffe, maybe."
"Are you sure?" His wife sounded peculiarly tense.
"No, it's a little late to be  sure,"  be  said, amused.  "Nothing over there I  can  see but cleaned  bone, and  the vultures dropping  for  what's left."
"Did you bear that scream?" she asked.
"No."
"About a minute ago?"
"Sorry, no."
The  lions  were  coming.  And  again George  Hadley  was  filled  with admiration for the mechanical  genius who had conceived this room. A miracle of efficiency selling for an absurdly low price. Every home should have one. Oh,  occasionally  they  frightened  you with their clinical accuracy,  they startled you, gave you a twinge, but most of the time what fun for everyone, not only  your own  son and daughter, but for  yourself when you felt like a quick jaunt to a foreign land, a quick change of scenery. Well, here it was! And here were the lions now, fifteen  feet away, so real, so feverishly and startlingly real that you could feel the prickling fur on your hand, and your  mouth was stuffed  with the dusty upholstery  smell  of  their  heated pelts, and  the  yellow  of them  was in your  eyes like the yellow  of  an exquisite French  tapestry, the yellows of  lions and  summer grass, and the sound  of  the matted lion lungs  exhaling on  the silent noontide,  and the smell of meat from the panting, dripping mouths. The lions  stood  looking  at  George  and Lydia  Hadley with  terrible green-yellow eyes.
"Watch out!" screamed Lydia.
The lions came running at them.
Lydia bolted and ran. Instinctively,  George sprang after her. Outside,in the hall, with the door slammed he was laughing  and she was crying,  and they both stood appalled at the other's reaction.